Additional explanations on backtracking in Ltac2 (#20434)
rocq-prover/rocq: doc/sphinx/proof-engine/ltac2.rst

Backtracking
++++++++++++

Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

> Backtracking failures (empty streams) are moreover decorated with exceptions to inform the reason of failure. These exceptions are then passed to the tail of a non-empty backtracking computation. The following Ltac2 type summarizes the model for backtracking computations:

Reviewer: this paragraph is in bold in the refman is that intended? I think it's because there's no empty line between it and the `.. rocqtop::` directive.

Author: fixed, thanks for the indication, space sensitivity without proper feedback is getting me crazy...

  .. rocqtop:: in

    Ltac2 Type rec 'a backtracking_stream :=

>     [ EmptyStream(exn) (* Backtracking failure holding an exception *) |
>       ConsStream('a, (exn -> 'a backtracking_stream)) (* Backtracking point with a value 'a as its head and a backtracking handler parameterized by an exception *)].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [ EmptyStream(exn) (* Backtracking failure holding an exception *)
    | ConsStream('a, (exn -> 'a backtracking_stream)) (* Backtracking point with a value 'a as its head and a backtracking handler parameterized by an exception *)].
```

Reviewer: also the ConsStream line with its comment is pretty long so has a tendency to overflow its box
![Screenshot_20250402_130237](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6ce979cd-5610-4aaa-9a09-a3cddf18b34d)

Author: I have tried the version you proposed (and many other) before pushing and I got the following error while building the refman:
```
Extension error:
.../coq/_build/default/doc/sphinx/proof-engine/ltac2.rst:478: Error while sending the following to coqtop:
    Ltac2 Type rec 'a backtracking_stream := [ EmptyStream(exn) (* Backtracking failure holding an exception *)
  coqtop output:
    Rocq < 
  Full error text:
    Timeout exceeded.
    <pexpect.pty_spawn.spawn object at 0x7df7131c6710>
    command: .../coq/_build/install/default/bin/coqtop
    args: [b'.../coq/_build/install/default/bin/coqtop', b'-q', b'-color', b'on']
    buffer (last 100 chars): 'Rocq < '
    before (last 100 chars): 'Rocq < '
    after: <class 'pexpect.exceptions.TIMEOUT'>
    match: None
    match_index: None
    exitstatus: None
    flag_eof: False
    pid: 1201850
    child_fd: 5
    closed: False
    timeout: 30
    delimiter: <class 'pexpect.exceptions.EOF'>
    logfile: None
    logfile_read: None
    logfile_send: None
    maxread: 2000
    ignorecase: False
    searchwindowsize: None
    delaybeforesend: 0
    delayafterclose: 0.1
    delayafterterminate: 0.1
    searcher: searcher_re:
        0: re.compile('\r\n[^< \r\n]+ < ')
   ```

Reviewer: It seems to dislike the comments, so I guess move them out of the code block. This also solves overflow issues. Something like
```suggestion
      [ EmptyStream(exn) | ConsStream('a, (exn -> 'a backtracking_stream)) ].

where `EmptyStream` is a backtracking failure holding an exception and `ConsStream` is a backtracking success with a value 'a as its head and a backtracking handler parameterized by an exception.
```
(NB I changed "backtracking point" to "backtracking success" as that IMO makes more sense)

Author: I abandoned the comment (but created a corresponding [issue](https://github.com/rocq-prover/rocq/issues/20438)). I kept your formulation of backtracking success, and added another phrase explaining that this success could be turned into a failure in consequent computations (in order to motivate/explain why we keep the handler).

  Ltac2 Type 'a result := [ Val ('a) | Err (exn) ].

  val zero : exn -> 'a
  val plus : (unit -> 'a) -> (exn -> 'a) -> 'a
  val case : (unit -> 'a) -> ('a * (exn -> 'a)) result

Informally, the primitive `zero e` ends the current computation and returns to the last backtracking point with exception `e`. In the stream model, it corresponds to the empty stream.
The primitive `plus t handler` installs a backtracking point around `t`, using `handler` to handle any exception raised by a `zero` while evaluating `t`. This corresponds to appending two streams in the stream model.
Finally, the primitive `case t` inspects the backtracking structure of a thunked computation `t` and returns `Err e` if `t` yields `zero e`, or returns the first backtracking point as a pair `Val(v,h)` of a value `v` and a handler `h` if there is any. In the particular case where the computation `t ()` yields an immediate value `v`, `case t` returns a trivial backtracking point `Val(v, zero)`. In the stream model, `case` exposes one layer of the stream acting as pattern-matching.

> Using these three primitives, thunks of type `unit -> 'a` (corresponding to suspended computations of type `'a`) can be seen as `'a backtracking_stream` when considering only the backtracking effect:

Reviewer: same comment as above about this being in bold

Backtracking
++++++++++++

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 2: Ltac2 models backtracking computations using lazy trees of values, where the "children" of a node are indexed by the type of exceptions. A lazy tree where every node has at most one child (or all children of a node are the same) can be identified with a stream. Streams are simpler than trees and it makes sense to use them for intuition in many examples; however, consistently preferring the term "stream" over "tree" seems bad.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 2: `Control.plus (fun () => 0) (fun e => match e with | Not_found => 1 | Invalid_argument None => 2 end)` is a simple example of a backtracking computation which is a tree, not a stream.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 3: Users should absolutely not have to look at Ltac1 to understand sth in Ltac2. Explanations can be copy-pasted if still needed and still relevant, but should not link.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 3: From I understand, it is a question of perspective. If you look at the backtracking points, then it is a tree. However, if you look at all the possible future for the computation, so the branches from left to right in the tree perspective, it is a stream, and Control.Plus is just inserting more future in the middle so concatenation with the rest of the stream.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 2: @thomas-lamiaux In accordance with this, I think that there are a few points in the Ltac2 documentation where differences are stressed with Ltac1, that are of interest more as principles of programming language design than of comparisons which the end user needs to explicitly think about.

Specifically, this **Overview** https://rocq-prover.org/doc/V9.0.0/refman/proof-engine/ltac2.html#id3 should be replaced with a short explanation of quoting and unquoting in Ltac2, as the criticism of Ltac1 is not relevant.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 4: No, copying and pasting is dreadful.  Users don't want to read the same thing in two places, plus the copies are guaranteed to get out of sync.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 3: > Specifically, this Overview https://rocq-prover.org/doc/V9.0.0/refman/proof-engine/ltac2.html#id3 should be replaced with a short explanation of quoting and unquoting in Ltac2, as the criticism of Ltac1 is not relevant.

That is a bit different. This is a comment about how Ltac2 is better than Ltac1, and this should be there because a bunch of Ltac1 user will read the Ltac2 ref when switching. However, it should not be displayed in the main body. It needs to be put in a remark or sth like that so that new users can skip it as unimport. So basically, it needs to be compartmentalized.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 3: > No, copying and pasting is dreadful. Users don't want to read the same thing in two places, plus the copies are guaranteed to get out of sync.

Ltac1 is **legacy**, we need to stop referring to it. Soon-ish, it will no be loaded by default, and a bit further in the future it will be completely removed. If a page needs to be good and complete, it is the Ltac2 one.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer 4: Thomas, what's your strategy for all the existing libraries written in Ltac1?  Who's going to convert them to Ltac2 or will they just become unusable?  (These might encourage migration to other provers such as Lean.)

The Ltac2 chapter needs a ton of work to make it user friendly.  It's not nearly as readable as, say, the Ltac1 chapter.  Who's going to take that on effort and when?

In the meantime it's not a problem to have a few hyperlinks that are readily tweaked or removed as the Ltac2 chapter is improved.

> Ltac2 models backtracking computations using streams of values: the head of a non-empty stream represent the first path of computation while its tail stands for the alternative paths of computation when backtracking occurs. The empty stream holding no values represent failure and initiates backtracking.

Reviewer: >Soon-ish, it will no be loaded by default

Unlikely

> Backtracking failures (empty streams) are moreover decorated with exceptions to inform the reason of failure. These exceptions are then passed to the tail of a non-empty backtracking computation. The following Ltac2 type summarizes the model for backtracking computations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Backtracking failures (empty streams) are decorated with exceptions that give the cause of the failure. These are passed to the tail of a non-empty backtracking computation. The following Ltac2 type summarizes the model for backtracking computations:
```

"These are passed to the tail of a non-empty backtracking computation." - I don't understand, odd wording.  How do you pass something to a computation?

  .. rocqtop:: in

    Ltac2 Type rec 'a backtracking_stream :=
      [ EmptyStream(exn)
      | ConsStream('a, (exn -> 'a backtracking_stream)) ].

where `EmptyStream` is a backtracking failure holding an exception and `ConsStream` is a backtracking success with a value `'a` as its head and a backtracking handler parameterized by an exception. When sequenced with additional backtracking computations, a backtracking success may lead to a failure with an exception that will be passed to the handler.

In practice, the backtracking aspects of Ltac2's computations can be accessed through the following primitives, defined in the `Control` module::

  Ltac2 Type 'a result := [ Val ('a) | Err (exn) ].

  val zero : exn -> 'a
  val plus : (unit -> 'a) -> (exn -> 'a) -> 'a
  val case : (unit -> 'a) -> ('a * (exn -> 'a)) result

Informally, the primitive `zero e` ends the current computation and returns to the last backtracking point with exception `e`. In the stream model, it corresponds to the empty stream.

> The primitive `plus t handler` installs a backtracking point around `t`, using `handler` to handle any exception raised by a `zero` while evaluating `t`. This corresponds to appending two streams in the stream model.

Reviewer 3: What does `plus t hanlder ; x` does if `x` fails ?

Reviewer: cf the equation
~~~
  let x := plus t f in u ≡ plus (fun () => let x := t in u) (fun e => let x := f e in u)
~~~
below, considering `a; b` is equivalent to `let _ := a in b` for any expressions a and b

Using these three primitives, thunks of type `unit -> 'a` (corresponding to suspended computations of type `'a`) can be seen as `'a backtracking_stream` when considering only the backtracking effect:

  .. rocqtop:: in

    Ltac2 rec to_stream (t : unit -> 'a) : 'a backtracking_stream :=
      match Control.case t with
      | Err e => EmptyStream e
      | Val (v, h) => ConsStream v (fun e => to_stream (fun () => h e))
      end.

    Ltac2 rec from_stream (s : 'a backtracking_stream) : unit -> 'a := fun () =>
      match s with
      | EmptyStream e => Control.zero e
      | ConsStream hd tl => Control.plus (fun () => hd) (fun e => from_stream (tl e) ())
      end.

The backtracking is first-class, i.e. one can write
:n:`plus (fun () => "x") (fun _ => "y") : string` producing a backtracking string.

>   .. example:: Behaviour of first class backtracking

Reviewer 3: Plus, it is not like it actually mattered too. We all understand both.

  val plus : (unit -> 'a) -> (exn -> 'a) -> 'a
  val case : (unit -> 'a) -> ('a * (exn -> 'a)) result

Informally, the primitive `zero e` ends the current computation and returns to the last backtracking point with exception `e`.

> The primitive `plus t handler` installs a backtracking point around `t`, using `handler` to handle any exception raised by a `zero` while evaluating `t`.

Reviewer 3: How is that different from raising and catching exception ?

Reviewer 5: Exception-raising code can have at most one success, the tactic monad is multisuccess. The intuitive model is really that it's a stream (where exceptions are options).

The primitive `case t` inspects the backtracking structure of a thunked computation `t` and returns `Err e` if `t` yields `zero e`, or returns the first backtracking point as a pair `Val(v,h)` of a value `v` and a handler `h` if there is any. In the particular case where the computation `t ()` yields an immediate value `v`, `case t` returns a trivial backtracking point `Val(v, zero)`.

> From the point of view of backtracking, thunks of type `unit -> 'a` (corresponding to suspended computations of type `'a`) could be modeled as lazy lists holding values of type `'a` where `zero` corresponds to the empty list and `plus` to list concatenation, while `case` is pattern-matching. To take exceptions into account, the empty list is parameterized by an exception, while the tail of a non-empty list is thunked by an exception (since `(exn -> 'a) ≅ (exn -> unit -> 'a)`).

Reviewer 5: I'd still leave this paragraph before the introduction of the combinators, I think it's clearer to say out loud first that thunks are streams.

Author: Here's a new version with the backtracking model coming first. I deferred the description of the API to come just after the model.
